---
title: Geometric intuition
tags: [algebraic geometry, Noether normalization]
style: fill
color: warning
---


# Introduction

This spring I have been taking a graduate class in commutative algebra, and I have yet to do algebraic geometry in a proper way, and have only gotten a small taste while writing my bachelor thesis. So this entire semester, I have felt this hinting at a geometric picture from the algebra itself, but i didn't have the insight to figure it out. That said, I now think I have the geometric picture for Noether normalization, which in term implies a geometric picture of Hilbert nullstellensatz and some other results. It took a long time to convert the algebra into geometry for me, and i still have much to learn regarding this. What i have started to figure out is the close relationship between ideals and varieties. I have for a while known that this is one of the main reasons to introduce commutative algebra into algebraic geometry, but i couldn't see the picture myself. Anyway, lets start with some introductory stuff.

An affine algebraic variety $latex X$ in $latex k^n $ is a subset of $latex k^n $ cut out by a collection of polynomials $latex F=\{ f_i\}_{i\in I}$, i.e.  $latex X = \{ x\in k^n | f_i(x)=0,  \forall f_i \in F\} $. The set $latex F$  of polynomials generate a prime ideal of $latex k[x_1, \cdots, x_n] $, which we denote by $latex I(X)$.  We can also start by taking a prime ideal $latex \mathfrak{p} $ in $latex k[x_1, \cdots, x_n] $ and generate its vanishing set $latex V(\mathfrak{p})$, which will be it's corresponding affine algebraic variety. More explicitly $latex V(\mathfrak{p})= \{ x\in k^n | f(x)=0,  \forall f\in \mathfrak{p}\} $.  The ring $latex P(X)=k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]/I(X) $ is called the coordinate ring of the variety. This correspondence is the key bridge between the geometric picture and the algebra, and the full relation is described by Hilbert's nullstellensatz. 


# Geometry of normalization

Before I explain the geometric meaning i have learned, I want to formulate the lemma in the regular algebraic way it is usually presented.

Lemma (Noether): Let $latex k $ be an algebraically closed infinite field and $latex A $ a finitely generated $latex k $-algebra. Then there exists an integer $latex d $ and algebraically independent generators $latex y_1, \cdots ,y_d $ such that $latex A $ is a finitely generated module over $latex k[y_1, \cdots, y_d] $.

It is often useful to know weather an affine algebraic variety $latex X $ projects onto a linear subspace of $latex k^n $. This can for example tell us information on the dimension of the variety, which again tells us other useful stuff. I have not yet explored dimension theory, hence the motivation behind this is maybe still a bit vague to me. This projection induces an injection on the cordinate rings. Let $latex A $ be the coordinate ring of an affine algebraic variety $latex X $ and $latex B $ the coordinate ring of a linear subspace $latex L $ of $latex k^n .$ By a coordinate change, $latex L \cong k^d $, hence $latex I(L) $ is the zero ideal, because it consists of all polynomials in $latex d $ variables who vanish on every point in $latex k^d $, which is only the zero polynomial. Hence the coordinate ring $latex B $ is isomorphic to $latex k[x_1, \cdots x_d] $.



A given projection $latex X \longrightarrow L $ then induces an injection $latex k[x_1, \cdots, x_d]\longrightarrow P(X) $, and a natural question that arises (somehow) is when is this injection a finite morphism. By definition this is the same as asking when $latex P(X) $ is a finitely generated module over $latex k[x_1, \cdots, x_d] $ or when $latex P(X) $ is an integral extension of $latex k[x_1, \cdots, x_d] $. Noether's normalization lemma tells us that this is the case when the projection $latex X \longrightarrow L $ is surjective.

I'm not going to prove the lemma, but i will instead present an explicit example. Let $latex k=\mathbb{R} $ and let $latex X $ be the variety defined by $latex x\cdot y = 1$ in $latex \mathbb{R}^2 $. This is a hyperbola with asymptotes along the $latex x $ and $latex y $ lines. If we take $latex L $ to be the linear subspace generated by $latex x$, i.e. the $latex x $-axis, then the canonical "straight down" and "straight up" projection hits the whole line except the origin.



Now, what does this mean for our induced injection? The coordinate ring of $latex L $ is just $latex \mathbb{R}[x] $ while the coordinate ring of $latex X $ is $latex P(X) =  \mathbb{R}[x, y]/(xy-1)$, hence we have the injection $latex \mathbb{R}[x] \longrightarrow \mathbb{R}[x, y]/(xy-1) $. If this was an integral extension, then every prime ideal of $latex \mathbb{R}[x] $ would have a prime ideal of $latex \mathbb{R}[x, y]/(xy-1)$ laying over it, but there is no prime ideal in $latex \mathbb{R}[x, y]/(xy-1)$ over the ideal generated by $latex x$, since all ideals in $latex \mathbb{R}[x, y]/(xy-1)$ that contain $latex x $ must be the whole ring. Hence it can't be an integral extension.


But, notice here that we in fact can do a linear coordinate change by rotating our axis $latex 45^\circ $, i.e. $latex x' = x+y $ and $latex y' = x-y $. Now the same projection is a surjection which in theory should make the injection an integral extension. 

The coordinate change gives us $latex x = \frac{x'+y'}{2} $ and $latex y = \frac{x'-y'}{2} $, thus we get $latex 0 = xy-1 = \frac{(x'-y')(x'+y')}{4} -1 = x'^2 - y'^2 - 4 $. Hence our coordinate ring in the new generators is $latex \mathbb{R}[x', y']/(x'^2 - y'^2 - 4) $. Now we see that this ring is integral over $latex \mathbb{R}[x'] $ since we have a monic polynomial $latex f(t) = t^2 - (\overline{x'}^2+4) $ which is zero at $latex y' $. Here $latex \overline{x'} $ is the image of $latex x' $ in the ring $latex \mathbb{R}[x', y']/(x'^2 - y'^2 - 4) $. Hence we have confirmed the lemma by an example. We made the integralness of $latex P(X) $ over $latex P(L) $ dependent of the projection, which is what we wanted.
